Alright, so let's talk more about conditional
operators in Python, but before we
look at other conditional operators, let's
review the code from the last video.
So on line 6, we test to see if the original
guess is less than 5. If it is, we print
another message and allow another guess.
If the original guess is not less than 5,
then line 13 checks if it's greater than
5 using elif. We allow another guess
if it's greater than 5. If neither of those
conditions are true, then the guess must
have been equal to 5. This is picked up
by the final else on line 20.
There are better ways to write code like this, as we'll see shortly.
We've duplicated exactly the same code in the if and elif
blocks. The duplicate lines are lines 8
to 12 and also 15 to 19. Whenever you see
duplication like this happening, that's a
good indication that it can be done
better.
For now, though, this example has
illustrated a number of important concepts.
Alright, so let's talk about if blocks. So a block
can be quite complex, including further
if and else blocks, and much more
contained within it. When testing for
equality, we can't use a single equal
symbol. The single equal is used for
assigning values to variables, so when
testing for equality, we have to use two
equal signs, the equals equals. An if
statement can include many elif parts,
but there can only be one else. elif,
by the way, is short for else if.
The else, if there is one, must come after all the
elif blocks. Duplicating code is
generally a bad idea. There's almost
always a better way.
When testing conditions, we can use any
of the value comparison operators.
Now there are other types of comparisons we can perform but we'll focus on these 6 for now;
less than, less than or equal to, greater than,
greater than or equal to, equal to
and not equal to.
Once again, remember that we test for equality using two equal symbols. That's something you'll
forget at first, but you'll get a syntax
error if you use a single equal, which
should remind you.
Alright, so now we know how to test for
not equal we can simplify our program.
What I'm going to do is change the first
condition on line 6, to check if the
guess is not equal to the answer.
Now so that you can compare the new code with
what we've got at the moment,
I'm going to comment out lines 6 through 21, and  put the new code before it. In the JetBrains
IDEs you can comment out a block of code
by using control / or command slash on
a Mac. So I'm going to select lines 6
through 21, control slash in my case,
because I'm on Windows. Now I'm not aware
how to do, have a way to do that in IDLE.
You may have to edit each line
individually if you're using your IDLE.
Now comments are ignored by the Python interpreter, and they're there to
document your code. In this case, the
comments prevent the code from being executed.
Generally, you should use them
to explain when you've learned you've
done something in a certain way, or as a
reminder of certain conditions or
variable states that may not be
obvious by looking at the code.
Remember that you may come back to
modify code, weeks or months, or even
years after you wrote it. Documentation
can be extremely helpful when you work
on another programmers code for the first time, or come back to your own code after a gap.
In Python, comments, as you can see, start
with the hash symbol, and they actually
can appear in a line on their own, or at
the end of a line of code. You can't
place them in the middle of a line,
though. The hash inside the string is
treated just like any other character,
and doesn't include a comment. If you
want a comment to span several lines,
and start each line with a hash, as I've done here.
Alright, so let's now start typing in some new code. So I'm going to come up
to the top here, and specifically on line
6, I'm going to start typing, if guess
is not equal, using the not equal
comparison operator answer :
and the next line, line 7, I'm going
to do, if guess is less than answer :
print parentheses double quotes and
Please guess higher, in those double quotes.
Otherwise I'm going to do an else,
noting that I've gone, indented back
at the same level as the if on line 7,
else : and I'm going to put a comment here;
hash guess must be greater than
answer. I'm going to print, or type in print,
parentheses double quotes
Please guess lower. Then on the next line,
I'm going to go back a level again, so at
the same level as the else now,
guess equals int left parenthesis input left and right parenthesis and closing right parenthesis
for our guess.
Then I'm going to type if guess is equal to
answer, so two equal signs, colon
print parentheses double quotes and
Well done, you guessed it, in double quotes.
else, again at the same level as the if,
colon print parentheses double quotes,
Sorry, you have not guessed correctly,
correctly, and then I'm gonna go back,
back again, so we're all the way to the
left margin, again lined up with the if
on line 6, else colon print
parentheses double quotes, You got it first time.
Okay, so there's our code. So
once again this highlights the
importance of indentation in Python.
Our second guess on line 11 is at the
same indentation level as the if and
else statements on lines 7 and 9.
It's not dependent on either condition, in other
words. We get a different message if
guess is greater than 5 or less than 5,
but line 11 is executed, regardless of
the outcome of the if-else clauses. I've also added a comment to the code on line 9.
This makes it clear to any humans
reading the code, what's happening. If you
were to read the inner block in
isolation, it may not be obvious that the
guess must be greater than 5, rather than
a greater than equal to, i.e. not less than 5.
The comment draws attention to the fact
that we would not have gotten to the
inner block if guess as equal to 5. You
can often do the same thing in many
different ways, and this is an example of
doing that. This new code does exactly
the same thing as the previous code -
that's the code now that has been
commented out on lines 19 through 34, and I'm gonna take the opportunity to remove our breakpoint there.
Now this can often confuse new programmers
because there's usually more
than one way to do the same thing.
Both of these bits of code will produce
exactly the same results when given the
same inputs. Of course, the code on lines 19 through 34 won't do anything now because they
start with a hash. In other words, it's
been commented out. They're ignored when
we run the program, but if they weren't
commented out, they'd produce the same
results as the code we've now got on
lines 6 through 17. So let's check that
by running the program to make sure that
it still works. Alright, so I'm going to
use the same guesses that I used in the
previous video. The first guess was 9,
so I'm going to do that again, and we get
the message
Please guess lower. When I enter 5 as the
second guess, Well done, you guessed it.
We're going to run the program again and
use 1 as our first guess.
So Please guess higher is outputted to the screen. 5 is
my second guess, Well done you guessed it.
So that's still working. Run it one more
time, run the program again, 1.
This time we're gonna enter 9 - Sorry you have not
guessed correctly. So that's working fine
and produces exactly the same results as
the previous, now commented out, code.
You may also want to set breakpoints and
run the code in the debugger.
Remember to think about which lines
should be executed before stepping over
the conditions to verify your results.
Alright, so I'm going to finish this
video now with a challenge and we'll go
over the solution to the challenge in the next video.
So the challenge is to change the
condition on line 6 to, if guess is equal
to answer, and you saw that previously it
was not equal to answer. So change it so
it says if guess is equal to answer, and
then change the program in the
appropriate places to give the correct
results. Alright, so that's the challenge.
See how you go with the challenge and we'll
go over the solution to the challenge
in the next video.